From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
In a dramatic vote on Tuesday,
congressional Republicans overwhelmingly
approved a bill that President Trump
spent months trying to kill that will
now force his administration to release
all of its files related to Jeffrey
Epstein.
Today,
the story of how a rebellion started by
a handful of Republican lawmakers became
a party-wide mutiny against the
president and a defining moment of his
second term.
[Music]
It's Wednesday, November 19th.
Hello, good morning. A little chilly
coming from Florida, not used to it.
I know everybody sees us today as grown
adults, but we are fighting for the
children that were abandoned and left
behind.
This is who you're fighting for.
This is who Congress is fighting for.
This is who the House of Representatives
are fighting for. I want to kick this
off right and I want to address my
>> I was a child. I was
in ninth grade. I was hopeful for life.
>> only 14 when I first encountered Jeffrey
Epstein.
And my daughter is now almost at that
age.
At 14 What we endured was real.
The truth has been buried in sealed
files and hidden records for far too
long.
The Epstein files transparent
>> Alone, yes, we are afraid.
But together
we are feared.
[Music]
Emotionally, this process has been
distressing. First, the administration
said it would release everything. Then
it fought to release nothing.
Let me be clear.
This is not a hoax.
I beg you, President Trump, please stop
making this political. It is not about
you, President Trump. I voted for you,
but your behavior on this issue has been
a national embarrassment.
[Music]
Because survivors spoke up, because of
their courage, the truth is finally
going to come out. And I also want to
thank the courage of two of my
colleagues in particular. Both of them
have suffered, as you know,
extraordinary political consequences for
what they did. And I want to hand it
over to my colleague, Representative
Thomas Massie.
I want to start by thanking the
survivors. I mean, they're giving
everybody hope in this country.
We're going to get justice for them.
That's going to happen today in the
people's house. We had long odds, but we
had some brave women on the Republican
side.
They were pressured in ways that you
cannot even imagine,
and they stood strong. My colleague
Marjorie Taylor Greene is one of them
who's here with us today.
[Music]
These women have fought the most
horrific fight that no woman should have
to fight, and they did it by banding
together and never giving up. And that's
what we did by fighting so hard against
the most powerful people in the world,
even the President of the United States.
And he called me a traitor for standing
with these women.
I wasn't a Johnny-come-lately to the
MAGA train.
And I'll tell you right now, watching
this actually turn into a fight has
ripped MAGA apart.
[Music]
It's about 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday
morning. We are standing outside the US
Capitol, where this really emotional
news conference is now wrapping up. And
it featured victims of Jeffrey Epstein
and this bipartisan group of lawmakers,
Republicans and Democrats,
who have
forced the Trump administration to back
a measure
that would require it to release
all of its Epstein files, something
President Trump has fought tooth and
nail.
So, we're now going to go inside the
Capitol to talk to our colleague Andy
Carney about how these lawmakers
persuaded President Trump into reversing
himself and backing this measure to
release the Epstein files.
And then we're going to watch as this
bill, in a couple hours we think, gets
passed perhaps unanimously.
And
Andy should be back here.
Hello.
>> Hello. Welcome to our humble abode.
>> It is about as humble as it gets.
This is our very exclusive closet. Yeah.
>> That we can just sit in every day.
Uh well, thank you for
making some space at your
little closet here for us
and for
making time for us in general today. Of
course.
So, and just to start, this has been an
extraordinary few days at the Capitol
that brings us to Tuesday's vote. And
I'd argue that this vote feels like a
major moment, not just in the Epstein
story, whose victims have pleaded for
it,
but for the entire second term
presidency of Donald Trump because of
how ferociously he fought this vote ever
happening at every turn and with every
available tool until suddenly he gave
up, which he very, very rarely does in a
political fight. So,
tell us the story of how, over the past
few days, President Trump concluded that
he had to give up the fight here.
I think where the most recent chapter of
this starts is when the government
shutdown ends and Mike Johnson, Speaker
of the House, is forced finally to swear
in this Democrat from Arizona, Adalita
Grijalva, who won a special election a
few months ago, and he was
slow-rolling her swearing in,
and that was going to provide the 218th
vote on this petition. Right, the
petition, which we should just say, as a
reminder, hearkens back like months.
Yes, months ago, Thomas Massie, a
Republican, and Ro Khanna, a Democrat,
paired together to start this discharge
petition. Discharge petitions are just
something that any member can do. You
have to get 218 signatures, and if you
do
>> Not nothing. No, it's hard. It's hard to
get these things off the ground cuz that
requires bipartisan support. If you do,
you can circumvent leadership and force
them to bring to a bill to the floor
that they don't want to bring to the
floor.
>> Right. So, they started this months ago.
When they first rolled it out, dozens of
Republicans were saying they were going
to sign on.
When it became clear that Trump was
opposed to this, that support drained
away, and there were only four
Republicans left: Thomas Massie, who's
the leader of the movement, and three
women, hardcore MAGA Trump loyalists,
Lauren Boebert, Marjorie Taylor Greene,
and Nancy Mace. Right, some of the
biggest names in the MAGA movement, kind
of the neon light names of it.
>> are like the rare House members that
regular people who don't follow this all
the time might know these names.
>> And know to be exceedingly loyal to
President Trump. They say, we will stick
with this petition.
That was immediately sort of interesting
that it was just the women who were
holding strong, and, you know, a few of
these women have talked a lot about
their own experience with abuse and
assault. Nancy Mace has, Lauren Boebert
has, Marjorie Taylor Greene has not, but
they were driven by personal reasons and
made that clear. But still it was a
question mark of if Donald Trump
continues to pressure them, and he was,
would they stick or would they try and
remove their names?
>> Right. So, let's get back to the part of
the chronology where suddenly, because
this congresswoman-elect is finally
sworn in,
their votes really matter.
>> Right. With Adalita Grijalva, it has
exactly 218. And the pressure really
intensifies on Boebert and Mace and
Greene. Hm. Trump personally calls Mace
and Boebert and is pressuring them
himself.
We learn that Lauren Boebert is invited
in to a meeting in the situation room
with Pam Bondi, the Attorney General,
and Kash Patel, the FBI Director, for a
briefing on Epstein-related matters,
which is just kind of unheard of to sit
in that room with one member of
Congress. Right, this is a room
the situation room that
I mean, we regard it cinematically as
the place where the Cuban Missile Crisis
is being overseen and where Bin Laden's
killing is being watched by
Barack Obama and all the guys that we
know.
>> all have seen. So, they bring Boebert
into that room of all rooms, and
presumably make the case to her that she
should not remain a signatory to this
petition. Right. I mean, we don't know
exactly what was said in the room, but
Lauren Boebert's probably never been in
the situation room. Just the whole
staging of this was clearly, you know, a
shock and awe of the treatment she's
getting in this moment when she's a
critical vote. But it doesn't work. She
does not remove her name from the
petition.
>> Mhm. And in fact, the extreme pressure
campaign on her actually made her dig in
more. Mhm. She started to get even more
conspiratorial about why they would were
so adamantly opposed to this. And
an interesting dynamic that unfolded
during the shutdown was Mike Johnson
recessed the house for a month. So, all
these members were home. And what I
heard is Lauren Boebert, Nancy Mace,
Marjorie Taylor Greene, all they heard
from constituents for a month was
"You're brave. Hold the line. Stay
strong. We're with you on this." None of
the feedback they got from voters was
that there was any repercussions for
going against Trump on this issue.
>> Right. It starts to feel like the truest
expression of MAGA-ism to these leaders
of MAGA is to back this measure.
>> Correct. They
>> is to give supporters of this movement
the transparency they want when it comes
to Jeffrey I think they become
incredibly
passionate and feel like they cannot
move. So, these four House Republicans
are digging in. They're back from their
districts. They are determined to stick
with this discharge petition. And it
feels worth saying that at this point,
because the 218 signatures are on that
petition, and this is going to keep
moving forward. It's eventually going to
become
a bill on the floor of the House
that Trump is now asking the entire
House Republican caucus to make an
impossible choice, because and correct
me if I'm wrong, Annie, he
is asking them now to hold the line
against this bill. He's like, "Sure,
maybe we've got this discharge petition,
but everybody else needs to stay with
me." Which means he's asking them to
choose him over the victims of Jeffrey
Epstein. It's the ultimate Trump loyalty
test. Totally. I mean, this was shaping
up to be a terrible vote for
Republicans. Not only choosing between
Trump and the victims themselves, but
Trump and their own voters, who have
been demanding this release. So, after
Grijalva is sworn in, it's just a matter
of what day Mike Johnson is going to
schedule the vote, because it's an
inevitability at that point.
>> Right.
>> decides to do it rather quickly
and just get done with it. So, Speaker
Johnson says he's going to
schedule the vote for early this week.
And it becomes clear internally in the
conference that many Republicans are
going to vote for it. So, when it comes
to this impossible choice, many House
Republicans are going to be choosing
against the president.
>> Correct. So, they start telling the
president this. Members themselves are
talking to him.
And over the last weekend, he was in
Florida.
And he's hearing
that there are going to be many
defections, and that the vote is
inevitable at this point.
And he realizes he is going to lose.
Mhm. And he does not like to lose.
>> Mhm. Another thing that he heard from
members
was that the more he was fighting, the
more it looked like he was trying to
cover something up.
So, on the flight back from Florida on
Sunday night, on Air Force One, he
drafts this Truth Social post
doing a 180 and telling Republic House
Republicans to vote for the release.
This was great news for House
Republicans, who were saved from this
awful choice.
And we immediately saw even the most
hard-right Republicans, who had said
they are a hard no, that it's a
Democratic hoax, they would never vote
for this,
suddenly saying like, "Yeah, of course
I'm voting for it.
Trump told me to." Literally. That's
what Troy Nehls from Texas told me last
night.
"Yeah, Trump said to vote for it, so now
I'm for it." So, once Trump reverses
himself and backs this bill, everyone
has permission in the Republican Party
to back it. And it sounds like almost
all of them
are backing it. Yes, it's expected to be
a unanimous or near unanimous vote to
release the files. No one wants to be on
record saying they don't support
transparency on the Epstein issue.
Even if just hours before they were.
Correct.
And Trump goes even further. In the Oval
Office on Monday, he says that if it
passes the Senate and comes to his desk,
he'll sign it into law.
Just a reality check here is that if he
really wanted to compel the Justice
Department to release these files, he
actually doesn't need Congress to tell
him to do so. He could just do that, and
he hasn't done it. So, there are still
questions on what will a release really
look like.
>> Mhm. What will actually be released? But
for now, it's just a total change of
tune. So, in summary, what really
happened here over the past week or so
is that a mutiny that was started by
these four House Republicans became kind
of a movement against Trump
that forced him to recognize that this
time congressional Republicans were
going to be the ones calling the shots.
And in that sense, it does kind of feel
like a real ground-shifting moment, a
real before and after
It does.
>> moment in this administration.
>> It feels like it is indicative of a
splintering that's happening in the
movement that we're seeing on multiple
fronts in this moment.
A realization that the base and Trump
are not totally aligned. And I just
think enough cannot be said
about the fact that four hard-right
Republicans
stood up to Trump in a way that we have
not seen any moderate or center-leaning
Republican do in 10 years.
>> Right. And they break with him on
something incredibly important to him.
[Music]
I mean, the story of this Congress until
today has been that they have willingly
ceded all of their power to the
executive branch.
And today is likely to be the first time
that we see Congress
dictating the terms of engagement, and
Donald Trump having to
cave.
[Music]
Annie,
thank you very much. Thank you.
[Music]
After the break, a conversation with one
of the four House Republicans who forced
the president to cave.
We'll be right back.
So, a couple minutes ago, I texted
Congressman Massie
and said, "You don't know me, but I
would really like to talk to you about
your role in all of this."
And I invoked our colleague Kitty
Edmondson, the Times congressional
reporter, who knows the congressman and
has his respect.
And he just texted back and said, "Can
you meet at Cannon Rotunda in the next
15 minutes?"
And so, we're now walking underground
from the Capitol to the Cannon Office
Building to talk to Congressman Massie
about his role in this very big vote.
Do you guys know what floor the Cannon
Rotunda is on? Two. There's someone
Three. It's three.
Four three, going up. Next year. This is
your floor.
Thank you.
>> Thank you.
Have a good one. You too.
>> You too.
Okay. Cannon Rotunda.
And
Congressman Massie.
I got to
go write a speech at some point.
>> Okay. Give me a second. Look, is that a
Is that a national debt clock on your
shirt?
>> But please, my eyes are up here. Yes.
Uh
okay. Congressman Massie, thank you for
making time for us. I know it's a huge
and important day for you.
This all very much feels like you are
doing what's happening today along with
Congressman Ro Khanna. You're kind of
singularly responsible for getting this
all started.
I guess I just want to start by asking
you, how does it feel to have originated
this all?
Well, a lot of people
>> we are. A lot of people said in the
beginning this was a quixotic effort
that was doomed to fail. And most
discharge petitions do fail. But here we
are. The vote's going to happen today.
And they can't do anything to stop it.
You had the fight,
if you'll forgive me, like hell to get
to this point. The president has
basically politically disowned you. He's
backed somebody back in your district in
Kentucky, who may or may not end up
running, but he's dis-endorsed you.
And he's trying to get you out of the
House of Representatives.
How do you explain why the president
would oppose
what you have described as essentially a
transparency act, an act of justice for
young victims of sexual abuse by Jeffrey
Epstein? Like, have you ever really
settled in your mind why he opposes it?
He's been, until this week, tenacious in
his opposition.
It makes you wonder if he's worried
about himself. But I've always
maintained that he's
probably not criminally implicated in
these files, that he is taking up for
friends and donors of his, and people
who were in his social circle in the
'90s, long before he was president, and
people who may be giving him money now.
My friend Ro Khanna
>> covering for some Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely. These These are people that
he knew. He He claims, and there's
evidence to this, that he disavowed his
relationship with Jeffrey Epstein at
some point. But he has colleagues and
friends who did not, and donors who did
not. They're what my colleague calls the
Epstein class. You rich, elite,
connected individuals who always have
thought they're above the law, and if
they ever get in trouble, they'll just
buy a politician. And in my district,
they're trying to buy a politician.
To the degree that this has become a
political story, versus what you've
always seemed to want it to be, which is
a story of victims and documents
becoming public,
it's feels like it's become the story of
you all making an end run around the
president when he fought this, and
Congress, in a very real sense,
rebalancing power
that it has ceded over the past year to
Trump and to the executive branch.
Is that how you see this? Is this an
overdue correction?
It is an overdue correction.
>> But, you know, it's the House that has
ceded the authority to the president.
The president didn't come and
>> Your house, your party. Yeah, Speaker
Johnson. The president isn't acting
outside of the Constitution. He's
getting the Congress to do nothing in
the face of what he does. And I wouldn't
say this is a a victory for the Speaker
of the House
because he has been fine with doing
whatever the president wants to do.
>> So, who's it a victory for? It's a
victory for the people who exerted
enough pressure on the members of
Congress that I think they went to the
Speaker and to the president and said,
"We can't do this. You can't make us
vote against victims of sex
trafficking." And ultimately, the
president and the speaker can do math.
They saw they were going to lose this
vote.
>> And then they backed it. And then they
decided to back it.
>> a cost to this all, I think your
colleague, Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor
Greene, just identified it out there at
that news conference. She says this is
ripping MAGA apart. Do you agree with
that? And to the degree that you do, do
you feel badly about that? Or is it just
the cost of forcing the president to
reckon with what the people want here?
If there's a cost, it's self-inflicted
by the president. He
and disowned
the portion of his base that wanted
these Epstein files released. He said,
"You're no longer one of my friends if
you want to release these files." And I
think that's when he lost a a large
degree of support. It's hard to say he's
getting bad advice. Some of the things
that he's done that we don't agree with
on the Republican side, we've chalked it
up to bad advice. But at some point,
he's accountable for his own statements.
>> Self-inflicted wound to MAGA from the
president is what you're saying.
It's as clear as day, that's what
happened. I'm glad now that he's joining
the effort. Let's just make sure
that they don't derail the effort some
other way. You said something a couple
days ago
to your colleagues who remained pretty
frightened about voting for this bill
before the president reversed course,
looked at the math and said, "I got to
get behind this." You said
that the president's endorsement in your
district, sure, that's going to help you
in your district in the next cycle, but
the memory of this vote is going to live
a lot longer than the president's legacy
or his political influence.
What did you mean by that?
Well, the president's giving out
presidential endorsements to Republicans
like Pez candy over there at the White
House. And but the deal is that you'll
always vote with him. And so, he set
them up in a situation where they were
all going to take their endorsement and
then walk the plank politically. On
Epstein? On Epstein. Put themselves at
odds with their own constituents.
And so, ultimately, I think he realized
he'd given them a bad choice, one that
frankly could cost us the midterms and
it could really diminish the party.
You know, ultimately, I think it was a
political calculation that he made, and
he released them from their obligation
to walk the plank. But you're also
telling fellow Republicans not to be
afraid of saying when he strays.
Absolutely. Nobody should be afraid. I
wish there had been more than three
Republicans who joined me. But maybe
we've got a message here today from the
rest of my colleagues, which is
when you're on the right side, when
you're on the side of the people,
especially when you're on the side of
the president's base, then you can take
that position and keep the president
honest. Maybe he'll come around. You are
what I like to call the tallest tree in
the forest right now. It's a short
forest.
>> And when and when and when Donald Trump
sees a really tall tree in the forest
sometimes, he wants to knock it down.
And he's been very successful at it. Is
that a worry you have?
I'm not worried about it. I mean,
there's already been $2 million spent in
my primary, and it's not until May.
I've got the support of the people in my
district, but even if I lost, I'd rather
lose and do the right thing up here than
make the kind of tradeoffs that you make
when you're scared And then he wanted
you to make
>> Yeah. And the vast majority of my
colleagues have been making.
Congressman, thank you. Thank you.
Appreciate your time. All right.
[Music]
Gentleman from Kentucky is recognized.
Mr. Speaker,
today is an extraordinary day in this
chamber.
If my colleagues will vote for this
measure, we'll see justice triumph over
politics. Truth will triumph over
deception and obfuscation. Transparency
The gentlelady from Georgia is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I proudly rise today in a bipartisan
effort to release the Epstein files
finally after five admin Mr. Speaker, I
move to suspend the rules and pass H.R.
4405. The clerk will re- report the
title of the bill. H.R. 4405, a bill to
require the Attorney General to release
all documents and records in possession
of the Department of Justice relating to
Jeffrey Epstein and for other purposes.
On this vote, the yeas are 427,
the nays are one.
2/3 being in the affirmative, the rules
are suspended, the bill is passed, and
without objection, the motion to
reconsider is laid on the table.
[Music]
So, the voting in the House is now
officially over.
The
measure, what's being called around here
the Epstein Transparency Act,
has officially passed
427 to 1. It was almost unanimous in the
end. A single House Republican voted
against it.
And now that it has passed, we wanted to
talk to one of the smartest minds
on Washington here at The New York
Times, Carl Hulse, to make sense
of what this vote means well beyond
Epstein and really even just this
moment.
Carl, just walk us through how you're
thinking about the vote that just
happened today in the biggest possible
context. Yeah, I think what we're seeing
is not just with this vote, but with
some other developments, the glimmers of
lame-duckism for President Trump. Just
just explain that. So, in my experience,
generally, you know, the lame-duck
status for a a second-term president
comes after the midterm election, and
they generally lose.
>> Which which is a year out from that.
>> Right. Which which is they generally
lose, and everyone goes, "Up, they're
done." Right? It's coming a little
earlier because the election earlier
this month, right, resounding
Democratic victories, bigger than we
anticipated, and up and down the ballot.
And
I think this is being processed
in real time by members of Congress. And
I think Thomas Massie said something
interesting about this. He said, "You
know, this vote is going to be
remembered longer than Trump's in
office."
>> You're literally you're you're reciting
the line that I recited back to him
today because it felt very memorable.
>> It's a That is a very incisive comment
that he made. And it's not just this
vote. There's some other things we're
seeing.
Trump was really determined to get the
Senate to back off on the filibuster
during the shutdown. And they didn't.
They they held firm because you guess
what? They need that filibuster beyond
President Trump's tenure. That's a case
of seeing beyond Trump.
>> Right. I think the redistricting but in
some of these these states are resisting
Trump, even though, you know, there's
like we're we're trying to do it. You're
talking about, for example, Indiana.
>> Indiana.
>> president went to them and said, "Okay,
it's your turn. And there's reluctance
because these are longer-term things.
And I to me,
it's important to note, people thought
that Trump is a totally different
politician and and he's not vulnerable
to the things that we saw
>> lame-duckism would be obsolete.
>> Right. That he's never going to be a
lame duck because of his
use of the bully pulpit as a real bully,
right? I think, you know, this is just
the beginnings, and Trump is still a
real powerhouse, especially among
Republicans, but I do think there's real
cracks in this coalition.
>> And once the cracks of lame
duckery, whatever we want to call it,
lame-duckism, start to show,
I wonder how much
they can't be papered over, and people
want to start poking their hole in it
and testing it, and it just kind of
creates an opening that
has to be exploited.
>> Yeah, I think it's just the nature of
politics, right? There's no stronger
emotion in politics than
self-preservation for most of these
guys, right? They're going to do what it
takes to preserve themselves. And if
they see that Trump is weakening,
they're going to make the moves they
think are going to help themselves. And
it's true, Trump is not going to be
around forever. Right. And for the
longest time, self-preservation for a
congressional Republican meant only one
thing. It meant doing what Trump wanted.
And now, what you're describing is
self-preservation starting to
necessitate breaking with him. Right. I
think you're exactly right. And I think
we'll start to see more of this. It'll
be gradual, but I think the trend is in
that direction right now. The fear of
Trump was paramount on Capitol Hill for
Republicans. That drove everything. Now,
they're starting to have a little fear
of voters
and that can make a difference
how they align with Trump.
For Trump?
As ever. Thank you very much.
Thanks for coming on site. Again?
>> Yeah, I like it. I think it really the
verisimilitude is good.
[Music]
On Tuesday night, not long after we
spoke with Carl, the Senate moved
quickly to call a vote in support of the
Epstein bill, which now puts the bill on
track to pass the Senate by Wednesday
morning.
If that happens, the bill could be
signed into law by President Trump by
the end of the day.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
During a meeting in the Oval Office on
Tuesday, President Trump offered the
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed
bin Salman, lavish praise and dismissed
a report from US intelligence officials
who found that bin Salman was
responsible for the murder of a
journalist from the Washington Post,
Jamal Khashoggi.
>> Your royal highness, the US intelligence
concluded that you orchestrated the
brutal murder of a journalist. 9/11
families are furious that you are here
in the Oval Office. Why should Americans
trust Who are you with? And the same
team as you, sir. No, who are you with?
>> ABC News, sir. You're with who? ABC
News, sir. Fake news. ABC fake news. One
of the worst. Before bin Salman could
answer a question about the murder from
a reporter, Trump interjected and
defended the Crown Prince.
>> You're mentioning somebody that was
extremely controversial. A lot of people
didn't like that gentleman that you're
talking about. Whether you like him or
didn't like him, things happened, but he
knew nothing about it and we can leave
it at that. You don't have to embarrass
our guest by asking a question like
that. And in a major blow to President
Trump's efforts to redistrict his way to
victory in the midterm elections,
a federal judge has blocked Texas's
newly redrawn congressional map from
going into effect.
Over the summer, at Trump's direction,
Texas Republicans had redrawn their maps
to create up to five new
Republican-leaning seats.
But, two federal judges, including one
appointed by Trump, found that the new
maps were unconstitutional.
Texas Governor Greg Abbott said he plans
to appeal the ruling to the Supreme
Court.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley, Mary Wilson, and Michael Simon
Johnson.
It was edited by Rachel Quester and Rob
Zipko. Contains music by Marion Lozano,
Pat McCusker, and Dan Powell and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
Special thanks to Julie Davis, Megan
Miner Robert Jimison, and Edward Isaac
Dover.
[Music]
That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]